PBM.mp4.mp4 

Transcript 

Hello, my name is Doctor Suzanne Telemundo, and I'm honored to have been invited by the DA BVP Payne Fellowship, the one year Pain Fellowship to speak on laser therapy or photobiomodulation the physics of laser therapy can be as daunting. As trying to give a presentation, looking at myself in the computer, which has been my block and getting this off the ground. But I am honored to be here a little bit of background on myself. I'm a 1995 graduate of the Atlantic Veterinary College in Charlottetown, PE I have practices chief of staff in multiple Banfield hospitals for over 10 years. At the beginning of my career. After doing a stint in equine internal medicine and a year of clinical in equine sports medicine. I've held multiple senior leadership positions, including National Medical Advisor for quality assurance for Banfield Chief Medical Officer of Guelph Veterinary Teaching Hospital, as well as various industry posts in education for rehabilitation and laser therapy. I attained my DAB VP in 2008 and canine, feline and recertified 10 years later in 2018. I obtained my canine certified rehabilitation therapy designation and this I do have to take a look at. In 2015 and in 2018, I opened my own fear free referral free standing rehabilitation practice in beautiful Victoria, BC, where I'm presenting to you from now. This hospital was a fear free restraint facility and I focused mostly on geriatrics, chronic arthritis, chronic neuropathic pain, and especially with a special interest in neurology. And intervertebral disc disease as well as compressive spinal injuries. My practice emphasized advanced diagnostics. I worked very closely with board certified orthopedic surgeons as rebels, neurologists locally and in Vancouver to provide the best standard of care. And again, it was a team approach and multimodal management that was integrated into my practice. I do want to thank my. Referring veterinarians as well as my collaborators for allowing this hospital to function at an extremely high level. I also would like to thank and acknowledge companion animal laser for some of the media content that will be in this presentation. And finally, definitely not last, but least I want to acknowledge and give deep thanks and respects to the families and their ancestors of the Esquimalt and song. These people whose gentle spirits guided me on my journey as I practiced on this sacred, ancient land. So without further ado. We will get started. So the objectives of this talk, we will look at the overview of the science of Class 4 laser therapy also noted in the more current terminologies photobiomodulation. So we do have to get into a little bit of physics because it doesn't, it does speak to the dosing and we need to understand dosing because this is a powerful modality. We'll then look at the physiological effects of laser tissue interaction. We'll look at clinical indications for laser, which expand to many general practice indications and certainly not just in rehab. And we'll just present a few current highlights of some research. There has been a lot more since. I first gave this presentation in 2017. OK, so laser is what people are most commonly referred to. However the terminology has been changed and what we really want to focus on is the term photobiomodulation. When we speak about therapeutic lasers, there are all different types of lasers and different classes of lasers, which we'll get into. But when we're talking about. Therapeutic lasers photobiomodulation is specific to that terminology. We laser stands for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. Other terminology you'll hear about is low level light therapy. You'll hear the term cold laser and we'll get into what does a cold laser mean? It has to do with the pulsing of the light beams, but Photobiomodulation is an all-encompassing term that has been added to the medical subjects index that does refer to all different. Forms of therapeutic lasers. So this is just this is not current. This was posted in 2017 when I last gave a talk, but it indicates the surge of research that there has been in photobiomodulation under these various terminologies. So this is just for your own reference. I'm not going to cite this, but laser therapy. Is it's not alternative medicine anymore. It's mainstay in in clinical practice. It's mainstay in a lot of human medical arenas and pain management and pain modulation. And and certainly we see we're seeing it all over veterinary medicine in 2006, less than 50 veterinary practices had therapeutic lasers and the number would be far in excess of 7000 because that was as of 2017. This is just some resource information for your own, for your own knowledge. I'm not going to read this, it's just you can look into these if you want some more details. There's an excellent textbook. There's some excellent Atlas and of course then in pub Med you can do research searches there for current research. So the classification of lasers. This is important because it it gets into what does the laser do? So they're classified according to the potential danger to the retina. So laser beams are reflected off surfaces in the retina, does not have any reflective. The cornea doesn't have any reflective surfaces. So there is danger to the eye. So a class one laser which would be like a laser printer is a Class 1 and that's considered safe. To the eye. Class 2 lasers. These would be visible infrared lasers that you would see, such as a barcode scanner in a store or bar, code readers, etcetera. Those can be dangerous if you look directly into the beam for more than .25 seconds. Class 3 lasers are classified according to one milliwatt, up to 500 milliwatts. And this does get into the arena of Sun therapeutic lasers. So when I first started in rehabilitation medicine, there were still a lot of and there still is. There's Class 3 therapeutic lasers, a CRT technician that I work very closely with in in Vic. She refers to me, and I actually refer to her for manual massage and body work. She has a Class 3 laser, so these are not without without therapeutic effects. But as we will get into in this in this presentation later, we'll get into fluency, which is affected by the wattage of the laser in terms of the depth of penetration and basically the dose is dependent on the fluency. Which is affected by the watts. So we are seeing much more high-powered lasers today than than we used to. I have a Class 4 laser which is a 15 Watt laser. My first initial laser was a 10 Watt Class 4 laser so anything above 500 milliwatts. Is considered a Class 4 laser. This these lasers do require by OSHA standards that we and the animals and the pets wear protective eye goggles to protect our retinas. So Class 4 lasers as I just mentioned, they're greater than 500 milliwatts. You'll see 10 Watt lasers on the market, 15 Watt lasers. Companion has come out with a 25 Watt laser for degenerative myelopathy, which we will look at. Some of that research a little bit later. So in terms of CO2 lasers, the wattage is what classifieds them as a Class 4, but the nanometers of light is will determine what that laser. And do so when we get into surgical CO2 lasers. We're up in the 10,000 nanometer level and those will cut because the photons are are absorbed. By water at the surface of the skin, creating heat so that we get an incision. The therapeutic lasers are in the 706 hundred to 900 nanometer range, 960 nanometers, nine O 4, and those will actually penetrate deep into the cells and we will get. Into the bio. Physiology of that in a few minutes. 

Addition of damaged tissue by stimulating cellular metabolism, thereby accelerating the healing process. A large convex treatment head can be used to compress superficial tissues, displacing excess fluid and enhancing laser penetration to deep structures as light pours into the tissue, photons will be scattered, reflected, and absorbed. Lasers operating in the near infrared spectrum from 650 to 13. 100 nanometers can penetrate to deep tissue structures. Light that penetrates into the tissue can be absorbed by melanin, hemoglobin, oxyhemoglobin, and water. Energy from these absorption events will be dissipated as heat, generating a soothing warmth in the tissue. The primary target for Photobiomodulation is the cytochrome C complex, which is found in the inner membrane of the mitochondria. Cytochrome C is a vital component of the electron transport chain that drives cellular metabolic. Some as light is absorbed, cytochrome C is stimulated leading to increased production of ATP. The molecule that facilitates energy transfer within the cell, in addition to ATP, laser stimulation also produces free nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species. Nitric oxide is a powerful vasodilator and an important cellular signaling molecule involved in many physiological processes. Reactive oxygen species have been shown to affect many important physiological signaling pathways, including the inflammatory response. In concert, the production of these signaling molecules has been shown to induce growth factor production to increase cell proliferation and motility, and to promote extracellular matrix deposition and probe survival pathways. Outside the cell, nitric oxide signaling drives vasodilation, which improves microcirculation in the damaged tissue by delivering oxygen, vital sugars, proteins and salts while removing wastes. These mechanisms of action have been proved by over 40 years of laboratory experiments using lasers of minimal power. The recent development of higher power Class 4 systems affords the clinician the ability to efficiently deliver adequate doses of light deep into the tissue to reduce pain, reduce inflammation. And accelerate. Healing, as you can see in this illustration, the advent of Class 4 lasers makes it possible to not only apply the benefits of photobiomodulation superficially, but to also treat a greatly expanded range of conditions by delivering a clinically effective quantity of photons to cells deep within the tissue. 

So that video is is definitely from my collaborators, a companion laser, and I want to thank them for allowing me to use this. OK, so let's dig into penetration parameters. This is important. It looks like physics. And I thought when I was taking physics, so the pain of physics in terms of preview. And I thought, I'm never going to use this, but we do use it. We use sound in terms of ultrasound, we use light in terms of photobiomodulation and laser therapy. So it is important. I used to glaze over when I got to this stuff, but we need to understand dosage. These are high-powered systems and we can do damage with these systems and. We take an oath to do no harm, so this is actually important. This will be some test questions. So wavelength this is the penetration depth. So as the video just commented on, it is the nanometers of light that will determine what that machine does. So when you get up into 11,000, you're going to be looking at surgical lasers, they're going to cut the skin. Some of these high-powered lasers do generate heat. And so for on contact systems, my companion laser, it will feel warm and soothing to the tissue. If you held it stationary or if if it's in contact with wet fur, it can actually cause thermal burns. So it does have to be moved. You have to be dealing with dry tissues because water absorbs. The photons, so absorption by the mitochondria, chromophores. The cytochrome C is the target, and that's how we exert therapeutic effects of increased cellular respiration. The power is the number of photons, so wavelength is the wavelength of light the power. This is the wattage. So 10 watts systems. A500 milliwatt system is a class 3B laser. We have 25 Watt systems that we use for degenerative myelopathy. Now as well as other very deep condition. The dosage is joules per centimeter squared. This is also the term that we use for is fluency. So when we talk about fluency, we're looking at dose. So we're looking at joules per centimeter squared and many of the systems will actually specify the joules per centimeter squared. That's what I record. In my medical notes for I record the walks and I record the area and I record the joules per centimeter squared as well as the time in my medical notes for the dosage of the treatment. So in terms of the pictorial, the wavelength is the depth of penetration. So when this the red is visible to the human eye, the near infrared spectrum is not visible to the human eye. So we don't see the beam and for our therapeutic Blazers, we are in the 600 nanometer. To 10,000 nanometer range. Above that we're getting into surgical lasers because they absorb water at the surface and thereby you get heat, excessive heat and cutting. OK, the power, this is the wattage of the systems. So this is a pictorial of five Watt laser and a 10 Watt. So this is the number. Of wavelengths of the number of photons, so they're both at the same depth of penetration, so this is a pictorial of 980 nanometers of a 5 Watt system and a 10 Watt system. So it's not going deeper in terms of the tissue. That's what the, that's what the nanometers of light determined. But it is more radiating photons. So it's the. Number of photons at a particular depth of penetration. So the wavelength. Take a look at this. We need to understand this a little bit more and how does the wavelength affect the therapeutic indication of what that particular laser does. So basically the photons are absorbed by hemoglobin, melanin and water. So those are not our target. Our target absorption tissues, we want the mitochondria of the target tissues at the depth that we want it. So basically, hemoglobin, melanin and water. In terms of therapeutic, laser will interfere with getting that beam to the to the, to the mitochondria of the cells that we're interested in. So the therapeutic window is the area where melanin, hemoglobin and oxyhemoglobin and water are the least. Amount of disruption if that makes sense. So here are some terms again, to go over these that we use and I used to blaze over on this stuff, but it is important we understand it. So the watts are we have one Watt lasers, 10 Watt lasers, 15 Watt lasers. So this is the standard of power of the machine. In Jewel, that's the work energy. So that is a standard international unit of work. And so a jewel in formula, some of the older machines we, as rehabilitation therapists, had to learn how to do the manual calculations of what the jewel was. Most of the machines nowadays, they will specify the jewels and ideally they'll specify the jewels per centimeter squared. So the radiant energy received by. The particular surface area. This is the fluency. This is what we're concerned with when we're looking at the dose. I want to know what the. Joules per centimeters squared are. OK, this slide and I promise we're getting out of, we're getting out of the physics, but this is super important, not just from, from a therapeutic standpoint. And and I'm going to give a personal. Experience of my very first laser was a super pulse laser and I didn't really understand this and it's important that I did. In purchasing my machines for the indications that I wanted to do them for so we have continuous wavelengths and we have super pulsing wavelengths and I'm I'm going to distinguish between those two. So obviously the continuous wave means that the light is being emitted continuously, a super pulsing. Has a pulse width of. 100 to 200 nanometers and then the machine can have peak power of let's say, a 10 Watt system. So my super pulsing machine, the very first therapeutically as I owned, was a Super pulse machine. It was a 10 Watt machine, so it was a Class 4 laser with a duty cycle of 1%. I never really understood what that meant that. And if I had the machine switched to super pulsing. Basically, at anyone given moment of a 10 Watt at .1%. Effectively, only one Watt of power was being emitted at any one point in time, which affects the fluency and the depth of penetration. So these machines should can turn them to continuous power, but I never really appreciated this and so this is a laser which the terminology cold laser comes from because these machines. They not emit heat when they're on super pulsing because the most amount that was coming out at any one point in time was one Watt of of later. So my current machine does feel warm. It's a 15 Watt laser. It's a continuous wave, so it does in terms of on contact, have to be moved. Over the surface of the skin or the hair so that it doesn't generate heat. So in terms of tissue interaction, we have photothermal lasers and these are lasers that are used for hair removal, CO2 surgical lasers use photothermal. So they're going to create heat in terms of surgical laser, the heat created is enough that it absorbs with water at the surface. Of the tissue and causes incision. Photochemical lasers. So these are things for or photo mechanical. Excuse me or things for tattoo removal. Carrot, carrot, autonomies. You'll see some of these in in some of the dermatological applications. Photo. Biochemical. This is where we are using our photobiomodulation. For pain and inflammatory reduction. So again, in terms of tissue light, tissue interact, the beams can be reflected, they can be scattered just like X-ray beams absorption. That's our goal. Absorption into the target cell, the mitochondria of the target cells and then transmission where they go straight through. So again, our goal is to be absorbed. In the cells, the mitochondria of the cytochrome C oxidase of the target tissues, we're trying to get to. 

Age. 

His wife just came by and she said she's gonna sign after the. So this is showing on how much scatter there is with an off contact probe. I'm going to play that again for you versus an on contact probe. My preference is. On contact, having said that, sometimes some of the areas, especially when I'm dealing with the severe toe arthritis, the pets may not tolerate on contact. And so I start with off contact till the pain and inflammation are reduced where it's comfortable for them to have it on contact. I'm going to play that again because we lose a lot of. Therapeutic photons with off contact. It's just showing the scatter in an off contact row. 

And. 

And how we're getting away from that with an oncoming. So the clinical effects of photobiomodulation we are modifying not only pain, but we're modifying inflammation which is which is what we want in any of the orthopedic diseases. We want to reduce pain and we want to reduce inflammation. So pharmacologically we would be using pain modifiers. Dr. Epstein will go into. All of the pharmacology and and the receptors on the dorsal ganglion for most of the pharmacology that. We use and laser is no different than that. Having said that, you're going to start hearing me talk about synergy. I don't use just laser. I do Electro acupuncture on almost all of the patients that I see as well as laser as well as multimodal pharmacology, so. We are going for synergism to get optimal pain release to reduce the amount of drug dosages that we have to use, but I use all of those modalities together for any given clinical indication. So laser does relieve pain, it modulates the inflammatory response and it increases micro circulation, so it does accelerate healing. So the clinical effects in a little bit more detail of photobiomodulation, it speeds wound healing and tissue regeneration through fibroblast activation and collagen production. It does relieve pain and inflammation and we'll get into the receptors as to how it does that. It prevents tissue degeneration and cellular death. It actually regenerates nerves when nerves regenerate extremely slowly. But we do know that nerves have the ability to regenerate, reducing edema. This is a powerful effect, and this can be appreciated in terms of tendon edema. You will clinically see this. In front of your eyes, you can have palpable, especially with my racing greyhounds and whippets, I can have palpable edema in in attendance sheet, which the owners can appreciate. And in one treatment that edema will cool and be gone. It's it's quite remarkable in terms of edema. I really like my laser for soft tissue. It improves red blood cell and lymphatic circulation. The lymphatic circulation is actually this nanometer. Just FYI, they are using and in terms of fat reduction, it emulsifies a lot of Cellulite. And so it's used in. On the cosmetic industry for reducing abdominal fat by falsifying the the fat and excreted in the lymphatics those laser systems I just learned this are actually in the same nanometer wavelengths as are therapeutic laser. So just kind of side note. Lasers do dilate and increase the permeability of blood vessels, so that actually is something that is super important not just for healing, but it's super important in terms of its contraindications, particularly in reference to if there's any active bleeding or neoplasia particular splenic amandio sarcoma. And I actually screen. My patients now with abdominal radiographs to make sure there isn't a. Yeah, he's like mangio and my geriatrics percolating as well. I want to see the lumbar spine in terms of the cases that I see and also it reduces fibrous tissue. And this, I've put fibrotic myopathy here in brackets because fibrotic myopathy as a disease that we see in shepherds is it's a horribly. The breast progressive disease, which we really don't have any treatment for once the criscillis, semimembranosus and semitendinosus muscles have have converted to scar tissue. So laser is phenomenal in these breeds that are predisposed to it to slow that fibrous tissue deposition. Yeah. OK, so mechanisms of action this is getting to to a little bit more of a biochemical level. It increases nitric oxide production and we'll look at what does not nitric oxide, do it increases beta endorphins, which also acupuncture works to increase central beta endorphin release, it decreases bradykinin. Levels we know those are important in the pathophysiology and propagation of pain and neuropathic pain. It stabilizes ion channels as well as the action potential for nerve. So in our pharmacologists, which Doctor Epstein will get has already gotten into, these are very similar mechanisms and receptors that we have on the dorsal root ganglia. And this is where we're using our pharmacologic. To target these these receptors as well. And so this is working synergistically with many of the pharmacologists that we use. It increases serotonin. We know serotonin can be modified, so we use serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Actually in chronic pain to help modify neuropathic pain blocks depolarization to help with neuropathic pain of the C fibers. And again, that has been covered adequately in terms of the. Half of Physiology of the pharmacologists that we use. This is working on similar synergistic pathways. So what are the beneficial effects of nitric oxide? Nitric oxide relieves pain, reduces edema, increases lymphatic drain, and improves wound healing. So was one of my back dogs. This is Samantha, one of my favorite favorite clients. And just a love of a dog. OK. In terms of modularity, what I love about laser and acupuncture that they have the same mechanisms of action, believe it or not, is that we're modulating not just pain, but we're modulating inflammation too. So pharmacologically where we use. Pain modifiers like gabapentin. We also use non steroidal anti inflammatories because we don't we want to reduce inflammation and we want to control them. We want both of those effects and laser class for laser therapy and effects. Both the inflammatory response as well as pain. So in terms of inflammation it modulates inflammation. By decreasing decreasing IL two, we know Interleukin 2 is important in propagation of the inflammatory response as well as prostacyclin PG I2. It increases leukocyte activity increases vasodilation. Reactive oxygen species are produced and I know that that typically we think of that as negative reaction R OS reactive oxygen species actually can have detrimental effects at high doses, but at low doses they have. They have beneficial physiological effects, so we get stabilization of cell. Membranes and increased production of ATP, which is the ultimate goal. So the mechanism of action at the cellular level, the video looked at this, we're looking at chromophores, chromophores absorb the light. So at the mitochondria, the target is the cytochrome C cytochrome C chromophore. At the target cell within the mitochondria. This is just a pictorial of it, but red and near infrared wavelengths of light are absorbed by copper and heme in the centers of cytochrome C and what that means is enhanced mitochondrial activity within the target cell. So the pathway is basically we get excitation of cytochrome C oxidase. This electronically excited state accelerates the electron transport reactions in the mitochondria. This alters the molecular and cellular signaling reactions in the cell and this activates the release of three. Biochemically, active substances, which is ATP, we know that from from cellular respiration, nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species. Again, this is a pectoral. I'm not going to read the slide, but these are the target productions of biochemical mediators that we want. We want increased ATP in the cell that's increased oxidation of the cell nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species. So reactive oxygen species has been shown to promote cell proliferation. Such as Carina Cytes skin fibroblasts, it induces neuronal differentiation which we want in neural death and and nerve injury. It protects cardiac cells and serves as important signaling molecules for gene expression, cell growth and transfer scription factor activation. So again, I'm not going to read this. Zone but in. Low concentrations. These molecules, including peroxidases, superoxide hydroxyl radicals, these have beneficial effects in low dosages. At really high dosages. These are detrimental and can cause can cause damage to cells. This is just a pictorial for your own reference, so similar to what we've heard in other aspects of this pain fellowship, you're going to hear continuously from myself and and my esteemed colleagues that we're looking for synergism in terms of managing pain and inflammation and getting the clinical response that we want. Which is reduced pain, increased mobility and ultimately better quality of life for pets and their owners. So in the pharmacological side, it's we're looking at multi multi management approach. And that's that's true as well. Not this lecture as of laser, but I'm a rehabilitation therapist, so the other modalities that I have in my practice is Class 4 laser. I have targeted pulse magnetic. Magnetic electrotherapy I have neuromuscular electrical. I do Electro acupuncture on almost all of my cases because I see a lot of spinal injuries and a lot of multimodal arthritis like arthritis, where it's all joints, severe spinal arthritis, severe neck, cervical, arthritis. These pets are painful. And Electro acupuncture is unbelievable for for for neuro presentations, for spinal compressive disease such as intervertebral disc disease, Spondylosis, spinal arthritis. It is one of my most powerful modalities so I use. Also in rehabilitation, we are employing therapeutic exercises, weight reduction diet, make 3 fatty acids. So I'm doing all of these things in my practice. I'm not well, this is just a laser presentation. I can't speak only to laser because I've never used just laser I employ. All of these in my practice, on every case, I do a lot of stem cell and PRP on elbows that we catch early elbows and stifles that are stage 1 and stage 2. We can medically manage those and we do it multimodality. So the contraindications I've touched on this already and this is super important because we take an oath to do no harm. These are powerful systems. We do not want to use laser over neoplasia of any kind to this end because I see geriatrics. I actually now screen, I require an abdominal X-ray on all of my patients. Before I get into into I'm, I'm treating these animals regularly and I'm not treating one joint. They have compensatory, almost all of my patients have stuff going on in the back, even if they present for shoulders or elbows or knees or. Lips. They have multimodal compensatory injuries and this is very, very, very good for that. So I'm almost always, especially with hip dogs, they're contracting lumborum, they're ellipsoids, they're going to be painful compensatory in these muscles. And so I'm using my laser not only over the primary area of industry. Or of injury. Excuse me, but I'm using it over there spine. I'm using it over their back. I'm using it over their shoulders so their necks, they're almost always painful when they have a hind end lameness, they're going to be they're going to be front loading their weight. So instead of having. 30304040 so they're supposed to have. 40% of their weight in the front, so 2020. And then 3030, I've got this backwards. Excuse me if they have a hind end lane. This they're going to be front loading and so their heads, they'll hang their heads really low and their necks on almost all of my hind end. Lameness, pets. Are going to be sore because their heads weigh a lot and when they're not holding their head horizontally, when they hang their heads lower, these pets get super, super painful neck. Can't use it over active areas of hemorrhage. It increases hematopoiesis and increases vasodilation, so these are going to be dangerous over hemorrhage and there going to be dangerous over splenectomy angiosarcoma if there's a pacemaker in the chest. I've isolated out arrhythmic cardiac disease here that's also contraindication. Or Electro acupuncture as I do Electro acupuncture in almost all the case presentations I see I have to screen for this. We've seen a very high number incidents of cases. Of boutique dilated cardiomyopathy in at least Victoria. There it's very popular for people to have their pets on raw diets here. And when I opened my practice, the word was just getting out in terms of big DCM. There's actually some prescription diets up here that are kangaroo. And boutique grain free ingredients like chickpeas and lentils. So I have seen quite a number of cases undiagnosed and I picked them up because. I'm seeing these pets for an hour to two hours every time they're treated, so I'll see things like exercise intolerance when I get to the stage of exercising and getting these pets fit, and so often I picked up and diagnosed quite a few of these cases. So now I do require if they're on a boutique diet or raw diet. First of all, we do some education with the clients on that and and with the referring practitioners in, in concerts, so that they're aware of the potential risk. Of of these diets, but also I do a screening pro BNP on these pets, which I think is a sensitive screening test for these cases. Most of the cases I have diagnosed do have at least a high normal Pro BNP we they were the cut off for Dobermans is 600. And we don't really have cut offs for normal of large breed only and the breeds that I see are all giant large breed dogs pretty much. So yes, I I I consider probing P to be quite a sensitive marker for the cases that I've died. Most again we don't because it increases cellular cellular activity. We don't want to go over open growth plates on growing pets, deep fungal infections. I'll show you a slide of my own pet and my skin from sarcoptic mange that looked like a hotspot. Then it made this go on fire with a couple of treatments. It was my own dog, and that dog was skin scraped. But I'll show you a picture of that. Pregnancy is all contraindicated, as is going over the thyroid, and particularly if there's thyroid disease. So Dan, I like to take this type of shot. This PAT had a neoplasia in in the lung lobe. It was metastasis. Glad that we did this because this is not a pet that I would laser, although it did have. You can see it has Spondylosis. So I like this on all my pets because I get to see the. Lumbar spine to know and do I have Spondylosis along with all the other things that are going on with that pet in my rehab practice? This was my own dog, who I lost to boutique TCM. Actually on a prescription kangaroo diet we got him back but he had definite dilated cardiomyopathy and we did everything including we did, we did biopsies on this dog. Looking for cancer and yeah, he had boutique DCM Pimobendan was amazing. We got another year and a half, so Natty lived to be 14 1/2 years. Pulled this was after Lasering once and that was skin scraped and it wasn't a hot spot and this was sarcoptic mange. The skin scrapes continue to be negative, but I did do a biopsy on myself because I got it and it was sarcoptic mange. So I did a biopsy on my own. Alright. Ologist to to prove that it was our Coptic name. So it made it made the mange lights go on fire. So it's important to do underlying diagnostics, particularly with skin lesions because we use laser for skin indications regularly. In the essence of time I'm, I'm not going to play this, but it's it's kind of a fun video. I'll just start it as to that's some some of the brief thing. Some of the injuries that we see sitting in rehab practice. See a lot of German shepherds rehab lots of neck injuries, lots of back injuries. Yeah. This is agreed. We see a lot of, for example. Secondary. I'll let you guys watch the rest of this at. At your own. I have a number of friendships. I just as an aside clinical note. 

Right. 

A lot of the friendships will actually be referred to me for what's thought to be something like this, because they'll. Which is which is not a complaining lane that's still have that root signature sign. When we looked at maybe folding up one of those. Look, look at next for these guys and if you. Do passive range of motion with clicking you can use a clicking to see what the normal range of motion and it's just a nice test. OK, so we can watch that at your own accord in the essence of time. So let's look at some clinical indication, common pain management applications and practice on the acute pain management side, laser and photobiomodulation is wonderful, not only post surgically, but interop we can put. Sterile sleeves on these and use them to close cystotomy incisions, gastrotomy incisions. It's wonderful interop. Dental procedures burns, otitis externa, which obviously can be chronic as well. Urinary disorders and gastrointestinal disorders. In my practice, I'm dealing mostly in the chronic pain management. So osteoarthritis geriatrics of various indications, chronic dermatological. Disorders intervertebral disc disease. Chronic neuropathies. And chronic self tissue in terms of my combination synergistically with Electro acupuncture and I am a CHI graduate 25 years ago, I actually assessed my dogs in terms of joint range of motion after acupuncture and then again after laser to get a better appreciation. For where I'm getting the most amount of clinical effect and I'm really love my acupuncture for my severe arthritis. And certainly for Minoru Mathies, we get we get about a 90% response rate on compressive spinal disease with Electro acupuncture. So we're going in basically directly into the dorsal root ganglion or not, the dorsal root ganglion. Excuse me, with the nerve roots where I'm going into the nerve roots with needles and then current generating in there. So in terms of pathophysiology, that was taught by Doctor Epstein that would make some sense as to how. Electricity is going to modulate the pain response going directly into nerve roots. So just some pictorials of some skin infection indications so hot spots, degloving injuries, snake bites. This is fantastic at wound healing I. This is just otitis externa. Again, I use this on my own dog to stay away from having to use as much Sir laran. I've got a two year early as one year, that's. Little, a 2 year old lewellin setter that he gets a little yeasty in one ear and he can be read near. Anthemic and I will cover the laser probe and laser his ear and the erythema disappears in front of your eyes, so I really like it for this. These are some chronic ears. We know how frustrating these can be before and after. Pictures. This is some wound trauma healing, and this was from a colleague for a previous presentation. I mean, this is obviously a horrible wound that has to be managed by second intention and you just have unbelievable granulation and extremely rapid healing with laser. So this I do like it for this. As a snake bite again, these can be really frustrating in terms of the devitalized tissue, the laser really promotes epithelialization neo vascularization, and of course you would do concurrent antibiotic therapy on some of these indications. I never use laser alone, I'm always doing proper medical management along with it, synergistically. This is a pad laceration. This wasn't my case, but. My boy, just before we came back from the East Coast, August 4th, I returned to Victoria and my guy cut up his paths really badly on bar clams and razor clams on the South Shore of Prince of Rhode Island, to where two days before getting on a plane. I had to suture a very large open laceration. On his on his central pad on one foot and his accessory pad on the other. So mine that I had sutures about 10 sutures in both feet and bandages on. And he ripped open his sutures. And if I hadn't had my laser, this took me about two weeks to manage this wound. But it it got to a point where it was non healing. And the laser, I just trimmed the margins up a little bit without having to do a full surgery again, just under some local lidocaine. And the laser closed it. Quite rapidly. Otherwise I think without laser I would have had to have done a major reopening surgery on on. So tendon injuries, this is a horse. I've treated horses with a laser and had some tendon contractures in a full actually that I've presented in previous previous talks that was going to be euthanized and laser and acupuncture got a 2 month old full who wouldn't was not able to stand due to tending. Contracture walking and he went on to race successfully. Spondylosis. Again, this is we're going to present some research on degenerative myelopathy and Spondylosis. This is a case of mine unbelievably painful. Back with neuro deficits and motor deficits. This case I was Electro acupuncture ring and we got this pet mobile and. Active and even hiking, so it's quite, quite astonishing when we combine these modalities. Hips again, hips, I am always acupuncture, ING hips and using my laser concurrently after for synergism, particularly for my quadratum, lumborum and iliopsoas, these dogs are all sore in those muscles in terms of acute indications, we can use these interloper with the sterile. Leave for Gastrotomy and cystotomy. Yes, this is a very neuro neuropathy. Painful condition is canine and feline gingival hyperplasia. I think we've all. Then around the block of extractions and home mouth extractions on these kitties that can be unbelievably painful and laser really does help with these. With these cases I have unblocked kitties. Obviously this radiograph, this Kitty has stones, but for those sterile cystitis, really frustrating, blocked. Cities laser I have unblocked some of them with laser where they have urinated without having to capitalize them. So in terms of orthopedic indications, obviously degenerative joint disease, elbow dysplasia, I've listed medial coronoid disease process here separately. I'll talk a little bit about those. This is one of the most frustrating joints that we see in rehab medicine and I'll talk a little bit more detail I sent. Quite a few of those to surgery. I we picked them up pretty early. At Level 1 and two Stage 1 and 2, where we can get in with PRP and possibly stem cell and clean those joints out. And because once arthritis and Susan an elbow joint, those bones are so fine in terms of their articulation that they're really frustrating to manage when they start to get to the stage that we see. In the radiograph above, hip dysplasia we've talked about patellar luxations. Obviously we still need to stabilize joints and we have various ways to do that. So without going off topic in terms of racing and things of that nature, cruciate ligament tears, I am a clinician. That's and Doctor Sherman Canap from the orthopedic Sports medicine clinic. He has excellent papers on cranial. Cruise ships medial coronoid disease process as well as shoulder instability and medial shoulder syndrome II. Encourage you to look at his website for the research there. But he proposes that anything above a grade two really should go to surgery, and I'm in agreement with that. If it's a full tear, I do not. I do not feel that medical management is is the way to return these dogs to mobility, especially large. Dogs and majority of what I see is is large breed or giant breed dogs. Some people do bracing. I leave that in the hands of people that are expert in that I've never really. It it's very, very technical to do that and again it's something I've chosen to stay away from in my practice fractures. I don't. I don't see fractures. I don't do acute post surgical, but laser is excellent in the healing of fractures, joint pain. And synovitis obviously and OCD. OK, shoulders. These are things I do see a lot of. We've got arthritis, that laser is effective for post surgical and shoulders laser helps with the healing. I see a lot of soft tissue such as supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendonopathy dies and I'm really liking laser for my soft tissue injuries. I find that laser for soft tissue is going to be superior to Electro acupuncture, where I really like Electro acupuncture for more of my arthritis, my bone pathologies and certainly any neuropathies or compressive neuropathies. So bicipital, Bursitis, muscle pains and strains as well as joint pain and medial shoulder instability, which we see a lot of in in our working dogs such as our our setters and our hunting dogs because they do rapid movements laterally whereby media. Solar syndrome. You you the musculocutaneous muscle that adheres the the scapula to the body while on on our dogs. Because of this rapid adduction they they tear those off. So you're flyball dogs? Your border collie. You're herding dogs. We see a lot of this again. Doctor Sherman. Knapp has excellent. Studies on that. Hips, I think we've already covered this stifles again post surgical from meniscal tears and ACL tears. Again, anything under Grade 2. I think that we can medically manage and this is where our regenerative medicine is really helpful with stem cell and PRP. I'm not going to get into bracing here. There are bracing options. Ortho pets is excellent at custom bracing for stifles. As is canine orthotics out of Halifax, NS. And when I have those cases, I refer them to colleagues that that are really good at that and do a lot of bracing. I I don't do it in my practice. We've already talked about compensatory myalgia, the QL and iliopsoas are are compensatory muscles. We also have primary iliopsoas injuries. OK, so in in closing the presentation, I'm going to recap some current research and there certainly is a lot more since I gave a research presentation which these are extracts, some I'm going to talk about degenerative myelopathy some studies in skin healing studies on pain. Laser versus ultrasounds, tendinopathies, osteoarthritis. And we're going to close with an exotic pace. There's a lot of detail on these studies because they were pulled from a research presentation that I gave. I'm just going to recap the study's conclusion, and you can read on your own these studies and then dig them up if they're of interest. To you. So I'm going to move through these fairly quickly. One study I do want to talk about, and I'm going to talk about this probably a little bit more in detail than some of the others, is a newer study that was done by Miller from companion Animal and colleagues and it was a degenerative myelopathy study with a higher powered laser. So the higher power laser that were on the market when I came out and rehab medicine were 15 watts and that's what mine is. Mine actually is a companion laser. It's a 15 Watt machine. I love it. I've owned two other lasers I've owned. Two other companies I've owned MLS, which is a Super Pulse laser and it's an excellent laser as well. But I would urge people that they understand what super pulsing does, so it's considered a cold laser, although you can in the settings turn it to continuous. I've had K laser, which is also a 10 Watt laser. So there's many different lasers. They're all efficacious. You just need to know what you want to use your laser for. So this study. So we know degenerative myopathy is it's it's very sad disease because it is universally fatal and the survival time after diagnosis is is very it's not very long at all. There was a study done on physical rehabilitation. Indian dogs and the average survival time was 255 days with intensive physical rehabilitation versus only 55 days from time of diagnosis. This study looked at basically fluencies, so there were two treatment groups and one was 8 joules per centimeter squared. At 904 nanometers, that was Group A, where Group B received with their newer 25 Watt laser. They were able to get to 14. 21 joules per centimeter square. So that was with a 25 Watt laser. And the research results showed that the higher fluency dose in Group B resulted in significantly longer duration. Two clinical signs and suing and to euthanasia. Then group Bay. Although both did have improved survival time versus no laser therapy at all, so both not getting laser therapy. They both had statistically significant increased survival time although group. B was significantly longer than Group A, so this is the advent of their higher dose machine which is which is available on the market now. Photobiomodulation on 3rd degree burns. This study looked at healing of third degree burns in rats and people said well, this isn't an animal study. Yes, it is. Rats are our pets. We we are diplomat and multiple species including exotics, and they looked at 2 dosages 12.5 joules per centimeter square. And 25 joules per centimeter square. The conclusion of this study and the reference is there if you want to look it up, is that the photobiomodulation at the higher fluency dose was effective in stimulating third degree wound healing from birds? This one I love because my own dog, believe it or not, is he's 2 1/2. He was two years and three months. He's well in setter, which is the breed that I've had for most of my life and I love this breed, but my guy has this. He has non inflammatory alopecia. He's bald on his neck and on his ventrum. And my laser machine has caused him to actually get some hair growth back. So this was a pilot study on hair growth and. Dogs and the conclusion was that Photobiomodulation showed promising effects for canine non inflammatory alopecia. And as an aside, the USDA approved PHOTOBIOMODULATION in humans for male pattern baldness in 2007 and 2011. He's looking to get out right now. Like like let me see your necklace. This is Quinn. You can see his neck, but you can see he's a little bit buggy. He had no hair at all and now he's got your baby hairs and you know. 

Yeah. 

OK, this is just. Some before and after pictures, and again I'm not lasering my dog all the time. But if I did, and when I was lasering him, but I don't want to go over thyroid glands, so I stopped lasering him. He did get hair regrowth and he is definitely non inflammatory alopecia. These are some other studies on skin that you can look at at your own convenience. A human study on pain in terms of coronary bypass very, very painful condition as hearts open heart surgery in humans. And this pilot study looked at the effects of photobiomodulation and the results. Again, I'm just going right to the results. I'm presenting these so people can look at them on their own accord for their interest to see some of the research. But the study showed that the verbal rating scores were significantly reduced from baseline. After day one and again after Day 2 and the pain became 0 after 54 hours and none of these open heart surgery patients required rescue analgesia. Back pain. I love Photobiomodulation on back pain. Obviously if we can impart such significant increase survival on DM where we have no real treatments other than rehabilitation and it's universally fatal. This has significant effects on on the nervous system and on back pain. So this study looked at Litecoin injection, radio frequency and photobiomodulation will recap the results. Only I do think that radiofrequency and lidocaine injection are very efficacious. I get these myself for desiccated ruptured disc. Discs in my cervical spine C1 to C7 in my lumbar spine, L1 through L5 from a severe car accident. And so I have a arthritic and blown discs across my whole spine. And this I find in human medicine this to be very efficacious. It's done. Under fluoroscopy and I every month that gets my neck and then my lumbar spine injected. And it does keep me mobile in yoga, spinning and and not pain free completely, but certainly efficacious. And I have laser to use on myself. As well, so it does reduce back pain. This study showed. Sorry, go back. The results showed that after one month, the Photobiomodulation group had a greater number of patients reporting 50% pain reduction versus lidocaine or radiofrequency. I personally like the injections. I don't really laser my back regularly, but I do like acupuncture for my spine. And and interventional spinal injections. This study I really like the look of a lot of people ask me if I have a therapeutic ultrasound in my practice and I don't have therapeutic ultrasound because most of the cases I see my laser gets at those cases and this study compared head-to-head photobiomodulation to the effects of therapeutic. Ultrasound for for shoulder syndrome and the study showed. I'm not going to go into the details of of the heat, this is 1. Of my shoulder patients. But the results showed that Photobiomodulation had a significant improvement compared to ultrasound in neck disability scores 73 versus 34% and algorithmic scores. So you can look that up if you want. I don't want to really recap ultrasound, but I think ultrasound in non union bone healing. Has some very strong therapeutic evidence of of increasing non union. Again, I don't see orthopedic repair, so I don't for me having two machines would be redundant because the laser does what I need it to do for the indications that I assume my practice. So the effects of photobiomodulation for recovery after intervertebral disc disease after hemilaminectomy I do have a lot of these patients in my practice. I also receive a lot of referrals from the neurologists locally that are that receive. Disc cases acutely with paresis and motor deficits, and they're not cutting them because we don't cut anywhere near the cases we used to. If they're still deep pain we that we do Electro acupuncture on these pets 1st and we get a pretty much a 90% response rate. With that modality, if done correct. So this compared to there's only one clinical study presented here. So I do apologize for that and I'm going to go directly to the results of this. This study found that photobiomodulation reduce the time to ambulation of a medium three to five days compared to control. I do want to apologize that it said that there was going to be a comparison of two studies when I presented a research presentation in the past, I presented 2 of the same studies back-to-back and the second study, which is not in here. Showed it that there was not a significant difference of photobiomodulation and when you got into the clinical notes on that study, basically the dosing there was question about the dosing of the laser. So I had presented that in a research study to show contrary clinical findings, but it was based on the fact that the dose. Was in question in the second study, so knowing the dose and recording the dose in our medical nose is extremely important. This was a Photo by modulation for Achilles tendonopathy. I love my laser for soft tissue indications. I see Whippets and racing Grays, greyhound. I love laser for the tendinopathies I see with these with these breeds. And the results are there, but laser provided additional gains and the results were statistically significant for photo photobiomodulation, I'll let you read that at your own convenience, but I do love it for tendinopathies and tendon healing and for tendons that have received stem cell or PRP in the tendons. This was the penetration study of PHOTOBIOMODULATION and equine tendons. And. The results were that the light transmission was not associated with individual horses, coat color, or the leg treated, but the tendons clipped and cleaned with alcohol had a greater transmission of light. That's important. Our machines now control for code color, so you have to set it if it's a light dog or a dark dog, it controls for a coat length, so you're going to need more fluency to get through my wolves and my. By Newfoundland dogs, they're giant dogs. They have. My Newfoundland has a dark hair coat. It's going to require more, more photons and more power, as well as to get through thick hair code. So this this study was just looking at things that increase the the depth of transmission of the light beam. So studies on TPLO and canine elbow arthritis. This was a double blinded study on the tplo surgery in dogs and the double-blind at prospective clinical trial. I'm not going to get into the methodology. The conclusion of this study? This was a good study. 2017, a single pre op dose which I found interesting. A photobiomodulation resulted in significant improvement 8 weeks post Op. But it didn't affect. Improvement measures of other outcomes. Now this is a 2017 study. I used my laser. This was one dose pre op. I use my laser. If I do see post op because I do send dogs to elbow surgery and for stem cell for ACL. So I'm going to use it post up in my elbows that I send. For surgery. So elbow arthritis. Again, this is I've mentioned this is one of the most frustrating lameness as I see in rehab when it's advanced because it's really, really painful, we call it jump down disease that these dogs that have elbow dysplasia or blunting of the medial coronoid process, they don't have to fragment that process. A lot of these dogs will just wear the medial coronoid process down over time, and then they'll jump off the belt. Me. And then they'll come in acutely lame. And these these are tough. And these I like sending. If I catch these guys early and we can catch them by joint range of motion, these dogs will be painful. Radiographically. They'll have early radiograph findings like sclerosis of the subchondral bone. Blunting of the medial coronoid process. As one of my surgical colleagues, Doctor Evan Crawford in Vancouver, Love love working with him, he will go directly into Arthroscopy the the cases that I sent him, we feel confident that the X-ray findings that we're seeing and what we're seeing clinically that there's going to be pathology. So he does not require CT scam. Before he'll go in Arthroscopically and that most of my clients opt for that because we're both fairly confident before he goes in and he shared with me that he found. That about 30% of his CT scans were actually negative that when he went in arthroscopically there was significant joint pathology. So by being confident with the early changes we see on X-ray before, there's a lot of arthritis as well as the clinical decreased range of motion. These dogs are painful. On elbow flexion, they're going, they're not going to have normal range of motion. They're going to be lane. And. They you know, these do great on on, on surgery like he cleans the joints out sometimes we do concurrent PRP and then following up with you know with proper rehabilitation therapy, laser therapy and healing these dogs. I've had a lot of these dogs do absolutely. Fantastic. So this was a study on elbow arthritis, an excellent study, 2017. This was a wolf that I saw. This was a pure wolf. This animal had unbelievable elbow arthritis, carpal, arthritis, hip. Arthritis and stage stifles. Nobody could touch him. This guy. This is how much they love laser. This guy let me acupuncture him. Whole body basically as well as laser and you know he took a shot at me once. But the medical records on this pet as nobody could touch him or do an examination on him, they feel this good. A lot of my patients would start to sing as they come down the street because this feels so good to them. This study found that and this is one of my patients of a more advanced elbow. And you can see that radiograph isn't very clear, but this dog was super super lame because it was advanced. So I like getting these guys at stage 1 and stage. 

2. 

So photobiomodulation at 10 to 20 joules per centimeter square was successful in improving lameness and over owner perceived pain scores and reduced and safe. Those in dogs with natural occurring elbow OA I do like acupuncture for for my elbows and I'm doing both. As I said, I'm acupuncturist. Almost all of my patients, as well as followed by laser. OK. So we're going to finish with a exotic case study. I love this case study. I see a lot of neck dogs, as I've already commented on a lot of Frenchies and Yorkies and and Jack Russells that have cervical issues and this was a transport Portillo's case and a giraffe. I'm not going to go into the details of the study. They're there for you to look at on your own accord, but basically this, this animal had seen a chiropractor for 13 weeks as well as concurrent Methocarbamol, and it did not. It did not help the deviation, which was a left lateral deviation at C3. C4 and a right lateral compression at C4C5 and you could see that in the initial photo and super cool case on a giraffe. So photobiomodulation, so there is no clinical effect. They weren't getting anywhere with this giraffe, and it was a juvenile giraffe and they started laser therapy at four months over these hypertonic muscles. And that's how much compensatory muscle strain can keep an injury in a myotonic state and basically. By a modulation was considered continued once weekly for nine months and after one year of initial presentation, the giraffe had nearly normal range of motion, so laser was very effective. Live on this a lot of my colleagues use laser and marine animals. Dolphins. We use them in turtles. I'm going to finish with with a video of called laser of a Bunny hopping. Funny, I love this. This is a Bunny with hip dysplasia and this Bunny received nothing more than than laser treatment. So that's just a a great video and and to end on a really happy note of what what are we doing with all of our pain. Pain module modalities and or the synergism of using our pharmacologic excellent diagnostics are supplements that can make 3 fatty acids our modalities and rehab of laser acupuncture pence technology. We're trying to get these animals. Pain free so they can be functional. And I emphasize this with my referring DVM's I don't take on a case that isn't willing to do the exercise in the work because we control pain and inflammation 1st and rehabilitation medicine, but then we put the animals to work and I have had a. Theoretic lab that came to me at 16 and couldn't walk on on its right side. It was falling over and he saw his 18th birthday hiking at Mount Doug and we lost him to not mobility. We lost him to to neoplasia prostatic neoplasia so. No matter how severe the presentation, when we employ all these modalities and then we get the animals moving because exercising itself, there is research, that exercise and mobility is pain. Modulating in its own right, as is fat reduction, all the mediators that that go along with being overweight and that's been covered in other parts of this program. So on that note, thank you for tolerating me speaking to myself. This was difficult for me. I prefer people and an audience, but I hope that you. On this clinically relevant and certainly if you don't offer some of these modalities yourself that you find somebody that does because they're super efficacious to keeping these pets happy and mobile and that's what we all want for ourselves and our animals. So with that note, I want to thank all my colleagues and. Good luck to everybody and it's invaluable to take these pain fellowships. OK, thank you. Have a great day. You have to pick up and turn the. Camera off. Sorry everybody. 

￼ 

￼ 
